README.md, before:

# FLExText Modules for the Pepper conversion framework for linguistic data

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/sdruskat/pepperModules-FLExModules.svg?branch=develop)](https://travis-ci.org/sdruskat/pepperModules-FLExModules) [![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/sdruskat/pepperModules-FLExModules/badge.svg?branch=develop)](https://coveralls.io/github/sdruskat/pepperModules-FLExModules?branch=develop) [![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.1492292.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1492292) [![Maven Central](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/org.corpus-tools/pepperModules-FLExModules/badge.svg)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/org.corpus-tools/pepperModules-FLExModules)

## How to cite

If you publish research for which this software has been used, you are required
to cite the software. The respective metadata can be found in the file
[CITATION.cff](CITATION.cff).

## General information


[Pepper](http://corpus-tools.org/pepper) is a conversion framework for linguistic data. 
*pepperModules-FLExModules* is a plugin for *Pepper* and provides an
importer for **FLEx XML**, i.e., the XML
export format from 
[SIL Fieldworks Language Explorer](https://software.sil.org/fieldworks/). 
The format
is used frequently for persisting language documentation data.

With the *pepperModules-FLExModules* importer, the data stored in FLEx XML 
interlinear text files can be transferred to another format. This way, the data 
can be re-used for other
purposes (such as adding different annotation types), or visualized and analyzed,
e.g., in [ANNIS](http://corpus-tools.org/annis), a search and visualization 
platform for linguistic data. For a list of available format converters for Pepper,
see the [list of known Pepper modules](http://corpus-tools.org/pepper/knownModules.html).

## Context

The development of pepperModules-ToolboxTextModules has been initiated in the 
[MelaTAMP research project](https://hu.berlin/melatamp).

## Requirements

`Pepper >= 3.2.7`

## Usage

- Create a [Pepper workflow 
file](http://corpus-tools.org/pepper/userGuide.html#workflow_file) for the 
conversion, with the importer set to `FLExImporter`. Configure #properties as
needed.
- [Download Pepper](http://corpus-tools.org/pepper/), and run it with the 
workflow file.

## Importer

### Requirements, assumptions, behaviour

#### Annotation mapping

FLEx XML has features that necessitate a certain importer behaviour with regard
to annotation namespace and names.

In *Salt*, the data model onto which data is mapped during import, annotations
can have a `namespace`, and a `name`. In *FLEx XML*, one and the same annotation
name, i.e., the `'type'` of an `<item>` can be used on different *levels*, i.e.,
`<phrase>`, `<word>` or `<morph>`, etc. Additionally, an `<item>` also has a
`'lang'`, so 3 attributes in *FLEx XML* (*level*, *'lang'*, *'item'*) must be 
mapped onto 2 attributes in *Salt* annotations.

To preserve the *level* information of annotation during conversion, the
*FLExImporter* maps it by adding the container (node/edge) of the annotation
to a layer with the name of the level, i.e., `phrase`, `word`, and `morph`.
Annotations on the document (FLEx level `interlinear-text`) are being made
on the Salt document (`SDocument`), which itself cannot be added to a layer -
the layer is a node in an `SDocument`'s graph. Instead, all annotations on the
document itself can be assumed to belong the `interlinear-text` level.

At the same time, the *'lang'* information is recorded in the namespace of the
*Salt* annotation.

Therefore, if clients such as exporters need to re-combine this information, 
they need to retrieve language information from the namespace, and type 
information from the name of the annotation, and the *level* of the annotation
from the *layer name* of the layer included in the set of layers which the 
container of the annotation is a part of, or the information whether an 
annotation is attached to an `SDocument`. The importer will create exactly one
layer for each level, which will be named `phrase`, `word`, `morph` (according 
to the XML schema XSD file supplied by SIL, paragraphs cannot have annotations).


### Properties

|      Property     |                                                  Description                                                   |                               Example                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                           |
|-------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `languageMap`     | A map with original 'lang' strings and the target strings the original should be changed to during conversion. | `<property key="languageMap">ENGLISH=en,NORTH-AMBRYM=mmg</property>` |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                           |
| `typeMap`         | A map with original 'type' strings and the target strings the original should be changed to during conversion. | `<property key="typeMap">txt=tx,gls=ge</property>`                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                           |
| `dropAnnotations` | A list of annotations that should be ignored during conversion. Annotations are defined as `{phrase\|word\|morph}::{language}:name`, of which the layer (the first) and the language (the second) element are optional. `languages` is a reserved name and will drop all language meta annotations from the child elements of `<languages/>`. | `<property key="dropAnnotations">languages,morph::en:hn,fr:gls,morph::dro,xxx</property>` |
| `annotationMap`   | A map whose keys are FLEx annotation and whose values are annotations they should be mapped to.                | `<property key="annotationMap">word::en:gls=ge,morph::en:gls=ps</property>`|


## One document per file

As *FLExText* files can contain `n` documents (corresponding to the XML element `interlinear-text`).
However, files with more than one `interlinear-text` element cannot currently
be processed by the FLExImporter.

# Development workflow

The development workflow for this project uses 
[Gitflow](https://nvie.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/) and the 
[JGit-Flow](https://bitbucket.org/atlassian/jgit-flow/) Maven plugin, which 
solves a lot of the headache provided by the
[Maven Release Plugin](http://maven.apache.org/maven-release/maven-release-plugin/), 
e.g., SNAPSHOTs in the `master` branch.

## Features

Features are developed as usual in feature branches and merged back onto
`develop` once they are finished.

## Releases

Releases are tagged as such on GitHub and must be released to Maven Central.
This is done by running `mvn jgitflow:release-start` and 
`mvn jgitflow:release-finish` on `development`. The JGit-Flow plugin takes
care of following the Gitflow workflow while performing a release to
Maven Central at the same time.

Note that the staged release will still have to be released manually through
<https://oss.sonatype.org/>.

Add anything that's needed to the GitHub release, update the DOI in the
README (prereserve on Zenodo), publish the GitHub release, and update the
Zenodo release.

# Javadoc Documentation

The Javadoc documentation can be found at <https://sdruskat.github.io/pepperModules-FLExModules>.

Commit message:

Update MANIFEST.MF with new version

README.md, after:

# FLExText Modules for the Pepper conversion framework for linguistic data

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/sdruskat/pepperModules-FLExModules.svg?branch=develop)](https://travis-ci.org/sdruskat/pepperModules-FLExModules) [![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/sdruskat/pepperModules-FLExModules/badge.svg?branch=develop)](https://coveralls.io/github/sdruskat/pepperModules-FLExModules?branch=develop) [![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.1492292.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1492292) [![Maven Central](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/org.corpus-tools/pepperModules-FLExModules/badge.svg)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/org.corpus-tools/pepperModules-FLExModules)

## How to cite

If you publish research for which this software has been used, you are required
to cite the software. The respective metadata can be found in the file
[CITATION.cff](CITATION.cff).

## General information


[Pepper](http://corpus-tools.org/pepper) is a conversion framework for linguistic data. 
*pepperModules-FLExModules* is a plugin for *Pepper* and provides an
importer for **FLEx XML**, i.e., the XML
export format from 
[SIL Fieldworks Language Explorer](https://software.sil.org/fieldworks/). 
The format
is used frequently for persisting language documentation data.

With the *pepperModules-FLExModules* importer, the data stored in FLEx XML 
interlinear text files can be transferred to another format. This way, the data 
can be re-used for other
purposes (such as adding different annotation types), or visualized and analyzed,
e.g., in [ANNIS](http://corpus-tools.org/annis), a search and visualization 
platform for linguistic data. For a list of available format converters for Pepper,
see the [list of known Pepper modules](http://corpus-tools.org/pepper/knownModules.html).

## Context

The development of pepperModules-ToolboxTextModules has been initiated in the 
[MelaTAMP research project](https://hu.berlin/melatamp).

## Requirements

`Pepper >= 3.2.7`

## Usage

- Create a [Pepper workflow 
file](http://corpus-tools.org/pepper/userGuide.html#workflow_file) for the 
conversion, with the importer set to `FLExImporter`. Configure #properties as
needed.
- [Download Pepper](http://corpus-tools.org/pepper/), and run it with the 
workflow file.

## Importer

### Requirements, assumptions, behaviour

#### Annotation mapping

FLEx XML has features that necessitate a certain importer behaviour with regard
to annotation namespace and names.

In *Salt*, the data model onto which data is mapped during import, annotations
can have a `namespace`, and a `name`. In *FLEx XML*, one and the same annotation
name, i.e., the `'type'` of an `<item>` can be used on different *levels*, i.e.,
`<phrase>`, `<word>` or `<morph>`, etc. Additionally, an `<item>` also has a
`'lang'`, so 3 attributes in *FLEx XML* (*level*, *'lang'*, *'item'*) must be 
mapped onto 2 attributes in *Salt* annotations.

To preserve the *level* information of annotation during conversion, the
*FLExImporter* maps it by adding the container (node/edge) of the annotation
to a layer with the name of the level, i.e., `phrase`, `word`, and `morph`.
Annotations on the document (FLEx level `interlinear-text`) are being made
on the Salt document (`SDocument`), which itself cannot be added to a layer -
the layer is a node in an `SDocument`'s graph. Instead, all annotations on the
document itself can be assumed to belong the `interlinear-text` level.

At the same time, the *'lang'* information is recorded in the namespace of the
*Salt* annotation.

Therefore, if clients such as exporters need to re-combine this information, 
they need to retrieve language information from the namespace, and type 
information from the name of the annotation, and the *level* of the annotation
from the *layer name* of the layer included in the set of layers which the 
container of the annotation is a part of, or the information whether an 
annotation is attached to an `SDocument`. The importer will create exactly one
layer for each level, which will be named `phrase`, `word`, `morph` (according 
to the XML schema XSD file supplied by SIL, paragraphs cannot have annotations).


### Properties

|      Property     |                                                  Description                                                   |                               Example                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                           |
|-------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `languageMap`     | A map with original 'lang' strings and the target strings the original should be changed to during conversion. | `<property key="languageMap">ENGLISH=en,NORTH-AMBRYM=mmg</property>` |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                           |
| `typeMap`         | A map with original 'type' strings and the target strings the original should be changed to during conversion. | `<property key="typeMap">txt=tx,gls=ge</property>`                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                           |
| `dropAnnotations` | A list of annotations that should be ignored during conversion. Annotations are defined as `{phrase\|word\|morph}::{language}:name`, of which the layer (the first) and the language (the second) element are optional. `languages` is a reserved name and will drop all language meta annotations from the child elements of `<languages/>`. | `<property key="dropAnnotations">languages,morph::en:hn,fr:gls,morph::dro,xxx</property>` |
| `annotationMap`   | A map whose keys are FLEx annotation and whose values are annotations they should be mapped to.                | `<property key="annotationMap">word::en:gls=ge,morph::en:gls=ps</property>`|


## One document per file

As *FLExText* files can contain `n` documents (corresponding to the XML element `interlinear-text`).
However, files with more than one `interlinear-text` element cannot currently
be processed by the FLExImporter.

# Development workflow

The development workflow for this project uses 
[Gitflow](https://nvie.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/) and the 
[JGit-Flow](https://bitbucket.org/atlassian/jgit-flow/) Maven plugin, which 
solves a lot of the headache provided by the
[Maven Release Plugin](http://maven.apache.org/maven-release/maven-release-plugin/), 
e.g., SNAPSHOTs in the `master` branch.

## Features

Features are developed as usual in feature branches and merged back onto
`develop` once they are finished.

## Releases

Releases are tagged as such on GitHub and must be released to Maven Central.
This is done by 

1. making sure that `develop` and `master` have the same HEAD;
2. running `mvn jgitflow:release-start` and 
`mvn jgitflow:release-finish` on `development` - the JGit-Flow plugin takes
care of following the Gitflow workflow while performing a deploy to
Sonatype OSSRH at the same time;
3. Manually closing and releasing the repository from [Sonatype OSSRH](https://oss.sonatype.org);
4. Cleaning and building the project once to bring the MANIFEST.MF version no. up to date with the POM.

Note that the staged release will still have to be released manually through
<https://oss.sonatype.org/>.

Add anything that's needed to the GitHub release, update the DOI in the
README (prereserve on Zenodo), publish the GitHub release, and update the
Zenodo release.

# Javadoc Documentation

The Javadoc documentation can be found at <https://sdruskat.github.io/pepperModules-FLExModules>.
